docs: add instructions on how to update a workload (#2278)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/content/en/docs/implementing/day-2-operations/_index.md

let's assume the following example, including
a [workload](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/) called `podtato-head-frontend` that includes a pre-task and
a pre-evaluation.

{{< embed path="/docs/content/en/docs/implementing/day-2-operations/assets/deployment-initial.yaml" >}}

Now, let's assume that the configuration of that [workload](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/) needs to be changed.
In this example we assume that the image of that [workload](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/)
should be updated, but a configuration change is not limited to that.
From here, you essentially have two options:

* **Only update the configuration *without* updating the `app.kubernetes.io/version`
label:** This can be useful when the change in the configuration should happen regardless
of the result of any task or evaluation, e.g., when the previously used image has a critical vulnerability
and the image must be updated as quickly as possible.
To do that, change `podtato-head-frontend` as follows:

{{< embed path="/docs/content/en/docs/implementing/day-2-operations/assets/deployment-new-image.yaml" >}}

* **Update the configuration *and* the version label:**

>    Doing so causes the `KeptnWorkload` that is associated
>     with the `podtato-head-frontend` deployment to be updated,
>     and therefore the pre-task `my-task` and pre-evaluation `my-evaluation`
>     are executed before the updated pods are scheduled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Doing so causes the `KeptnWorkload` that is associated
with the `podtato-head-frontend` deployment to be updated,
and therefore the pre-task `my-task` and pre-evaluation `my-evaluation`
are executed before the updated pods are scheduled.
```

podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-0.1.0-6bch3iak   podtato-head   0.1.0     Completed
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-0.1.0-hf52kauz   podtato-head   0.1.0     Completed
```

## Adding a new Workload to an Application

To add a new workload (e.g. a new deployment) to an existing app,
you will need to:
* Make sure the
`keptn.sh/app`/`app.kubernetes.io/part-of` label/annotation is present
on the new workload
* Add the new workload to the `KeptnApp`, if you have defined the `KeptnApp`
yourself previously.
If the application has been discovered automatically, this step is not needed.

For example, to add the deployment `podtato-head-left-leg` to the
`podtato-head` application, the configuration for that new deployment
would look like this, with the required label being set:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-left-leg
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-left-leg
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.1.0
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-frontend

>           image: podtato-head-left-leg:a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          image: podtato-head-left-leg:v1
```

---
title: Day 2 Operations with Keptn
description: How to operate and maintain your Keptn Apps

> weight: 20

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
weight: 500
```
I'm thinking this should be after what we currently have there

---

After you have successfully rolled out your application by following
the instructions in the [integration guide](../integrate),
Keptn also assists you with day 2 operations for your application.

> Tasks that fall under this category could be:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tasks that fall under this category include:
```

* Updating the version of one or more workloads that are part of
the same application.
* Adding a new workload to an existing application
* Monitoring the health of your application using `KeptnMetrics`
* Optimizing the resource usage of your applications by integrating
`KeptnMetrics` into a
[HorizontalPodAutoscaler (HPA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/)

## Updating Workload Versions

After a first successful deployment of your application with Keptn,

> you will eventually have the need for updating the version of one or

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you will eventually need to update the version of one or
```

more workloads that are part of the application.

> This will usually involve updating the image of a deployment,
> but also a change in the configuration of a deployment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This usually involves updating the image of a deployment
and changing the configuration of a deployment.
```

> (e.g. using a different service account name for a pod) could be seen as
> an update.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, using a different service account name for a pod
could be seen as an update.
```

> Regardless of that however, it is the user who decides what Keptn

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Regardless of that, however, it is the user who decides what Keptn
```

> will see as a version bump in the application by setting the value of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
sees as a version bump in the application by setting the value of
```

the `keptn.sh/version` or `app.kubernetes.io/version` labels/annotations
in their workloads.

> Only when this changes, Keptn will interpret a change as a new version
> and will thus re-run the pre- and post-tasks/evaluations for the application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When this changes, Keptn interprets a change as a new version
and thus re-runs the pre- and post-tasks and evaluations for the application.
```

> If the version label/annotation does not change, Keptn will not consider
> a change of a workload configuration as an update, and therefore no pre-
> and post-tasks/evaluations will be executed as those have already been
> completed for the related `WorkloadVersion`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the version label/annotation does not change, Keptn does not consider
a change of a workload configuration to be an update, and therefore no pre-
and post-tasks/evaluations are executed because they have already been
completed for the related `WorkloadVersion`.
```

a pre-evaluation.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: podtato-kubectl
  annotations:
    keptn.sh/lifecycle-toolkit: "enabled"

---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-frontend
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-frontend
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.1.0
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-evaluations: my-evaluation
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-tasks: my-task
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-frontend
          image: podtato-head-frontend:a
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-hat
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  replicas: 1
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-hat
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.1.1
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-hat
          image: podtato-head-hat:a
```

Now, let's assume that the configuration of that workload needs to be changed.

> In this example we will assume that the image of that workload

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example we assume that the image of that workload
```

should be updated, but a configuration change is not limited to that.
From here, you essentially have two options:

* **Only update the configuration *without* updating the `app.kubernetes.io/version`

> label:** This can be of use when the change in the configuration should happen regardless

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
label:** This can be useful when the change in the configuration should happen regardless
```

> of the result of any task or evaluation, e.g., when there was a critical
> vulnerability in the previously used image and the image needs to be updated as quickly as possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of the result of any task or evaluation, e.g., when the previously used image has a critical vulnerability
and the image must be updated as quickly as possible.
```

> If you wish to do that, then the `podtato-head-frontend` would be changed as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To do that, change `podtato-head-frontend` as follows:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-frontend
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-frontend
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.1.0 # The version label stays the same and therefore no related KeptnWorkload will be affected
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-evaluations: my-evaluation
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-tasks: my-task
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-frontend
          image: podtato-head-frontend:b # Only the image tag has been updated from 'a' to 'b'
```

> * **Update the configuration *and* the version label:** Doing so will cause the
> `KeptnWorkload`, that is associated to the `podtato-head-frontend` deployment,
> to be updated, and therefore the pre-task `my-task` and pre-evaluation `my-evaluation`
> will be executed before the updated pods will be scheduled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Update the configuration *and* the version label:** 
   Doing so causes the`KeptnWorkload` that is associated
    with the `podtato-head-frontend` deployment to be updated,
    and therefore the pre-task `my-task` and pre-evaluation `my-evaluation`
    are executed before the updated pods are scheduled.
```

> In this case, the deployment would be changed as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case, the deployment should be changed as follows:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-frontend
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-frontend
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.2.0 # The version label is now updated as well
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-evaluations: my-evaluation
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-tasks: my-task
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-frontend
          image: podtato-head-frontend:b # The image tag has been updated from 'a' to 'b'
```

If you have defined the related `KeptnApp` resource yourself,

> this will also need to be updated to refer to the updated `KeptnWorkload`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this must also be updated to refer to the updated `KeptnWorkload`.
```

This is a mandatory step, since the `KeptnWorkload` associated with

> this updated deployment will not be able to progress otherwise.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this updated deployment is not able to progress otherwise.
```

Therefore, make sure that the version of `podtato-head-frontend`
is updated accordingly:

```yaml
apiVersion: lifecycle.keptn.sh/v1alpha3
kind: KeptnApp
metadata:
  name: podtato-head
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  version: "0.1.0"
  preDeploymentTasks:
    - wait-for-prometheus
  postDeploymentTasks:
    - post-deployment-loadtests
  workloads:
  - name: podtato-head-frontend
    version: 0.2.0 # Updated version. Needs to be set to the value of the 'app.kubernetes.io/version' label of the updated deployment
  - name: podtato-head-hat
    version: 1.1.1
```

> Updating the `KeptnApp` will also result in all pre-/post-tasks/evaluations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Updating the `KeptnApp` also causes all pre-/post-tasks/evaluations
```

> of the `KeptnApp` being executed again.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of the `KeptnApp` to be executed again.
```

> In this example, this would mean that the tasks `wait-for-prometheus`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, this means that the tasks `wait-for-prometheus`,
```

and `post-deployment-loadtests` will run again.

If you are using the [automatic app discovery](../integrate#use-keptn-automatic-app-discovery),

> updating the `KeptnApp` resource is not needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you do not need to update the `KeptnApp` resource.
```

podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-podtato-head-hat-0.1.1        podtato-head    podtato-head-podtato-head-hat        0.1.1                Completed
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-podtato-head-frontend-0.2.0   podtato-head    podtato-head-podtato-head-frontend   0.2.0                Completed
```

As can be seen in the output of the command, the `KeptnWorkloadVersions` from the previous deployment
are still here, but a new `KeptnWorkloadVersion` for the updated workload has been added.
For the workload that remained unchanged (`podtato-head-hat`), no new `KeptnWorkloadVersion`
needed to be created.

Similarly, retrieving the list of `KeptnAppVersions` will reflect the update by
returning a newly created `KeptnAppVersion`.

```shell
$ kubectl get keptnappversion -n podtato-kubectl

NAMESPACE         NAME                          APPNAME        VERSION   PHASE
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-0.1.0-6bch3iak   podtato-head   0.1.0     Completed
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-0.1.0-hf52kauz   podtato-head   0.1.0     Completed
```

## Adding a new Workload to an Application

To add a new workload (e.g. a new deployment) to an existing app,

> you will need to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you must:
```

* Make sure the
`keptn.sh/app`/`app.kubernetes.io/part-of` label/annotation is present
on the new workload

> * Add the new workload to the `KeptnApp`, if you have defined the `KeptnApp`
> yourself previously.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Add the new workload to the `KeptnApp`,
if you have previously defined the `KeptnApp resource manually.
```

If the application has been discovered automatically, this step is not needed.

For example, to add the deployment `podtato-head-left-leg` to the
`podtato-head` application, the configuration for that new deployment
would look like this, with the required label being set:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-left-leg
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-left-leg
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.1.0
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-frontend
          image: podtato-head-left-leg:a
```

The `KeptnApp`, if defined by the user, should contain the
reference to the newly added workload.

> This is mandatory, as the workload itself will not be able to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is mandatory, as the workload itself is not be able to
```

progress if it is not part of a `KeptnApp`.

> For automatically discovered apps this will be done

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For automatically discovered apps this is done
```

  preDeploymentTasks:
    - wait-for-prometheus
  postDeploymentTasks:
    - post-deployment-loadtests
  workloads:
  - name: podtato-head-frontend
    version: 0.1.0
  - name: podtato-head-hat
    version: 1.1.1
  - name: podtato-head-left-leg # The newly added workload
    version: 0.1.0
```

After applying the updated manifests, you can monitor the status
of the application and related workloads using the following commands:

```shell
$ kubectl get keptnworkloadversion -n podtato-kubectl

NAMESPACE   NAME                                             APPNAME         WORKLOADNAME                         WORKLOADVERSION      PHASE
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-podtato-head-frontend-0.1.0   podtato-head    podtato-head-podtato-head-frontend   0.1.0                Completed
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-podtato-head-hat-0.1.1        podtato-head    podtato-head-podtato-head-hat        0.1.1                Completed
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-podtato-head-left-leg-0.1.0   podtato-head    podtato-head-podtato-head-left-leg   0.1.0                Completed
```

As can be seen in the output of the command, in addition
to the previous `KeptnWorkloadVersions`, the newly created

> `KeptnWorkloadVersion` `podtato-head-podtato-head-left-leg-0.1.0` has been added

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`KeptnWorkloadVersion`, `podtato-head-podtato-head-left-leg-0.1.0` has been added
```

---
title: Day 2 Operations with Keptn
description: How to operate and maintain your Keptn Apps
weight: 500
---

After you have successfully rolled out your application by following
the instructions in the [integration guide](../integrate),
Keptn also assists you with day 2 operations for your application.

> Tasks that fall under this category include:

Reviewer 4: you could link the following points to the different subsections that explain them so that users can easily jump right to where they wanna go

* Updating the version of one or more workloads that are part of

> the same application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the same application
```

* Adding a new workload to an existing application

> * Monitoring the health of your application using `KeptnMetrics`

Reviewer 5: should these last two point to the guides we already have [here](https://lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/implementing/evaluatemetrics/)? 🤔 it contains metrics and hpa example

Author: yes good idea, will add the links to those sections

* Optimizing the resource usage of your applications by integrating
`KeptnMetrics` into a
[HorizontalPodAutoscaler (HPA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/)

## Updating Workload Versions

After a first successful deployment of your application with Keptn,
you will eventually need to update the version of one or
more workloads that are part of the application.
This usually involves updating the image of a deployment
and changing the configuration of a deployment.
For example, using a different service account name for a pod
could be seen as an update.
Regardless of that, however, it is the user who decides what Keptn
sees as a version bump in the application by setting the value of
the `keptn.sh/version` or `app.kubernetes.io/version` labels/annotations
in their workloads.

When this changes, Keptn interprets a change as a new version
and thus re-runs the pre- and post-tasks and evaluations for the application.

If the version label/annotation does not change, Keptn does not consider
a change of a workload configuration to be an update, and therefore no pre-
and post-tasks/evaluations are executed because they have already been

> completed for the related `WorkloadVersion`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
completed for the version set in the labels/annotations.
```

To illustrate the update of a workload,
let's assume the following example, including
a workload called `podtato-head-frontend` that includes a pre-task and
a pre-evaluation.

> ```yaml

Reviewer 4: please use external asset files and include them here for all the code examples in this file :)

    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-frontend
          image: podtato-head-frontend:a
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-hat
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  replicas: 1
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-hat
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.1.1
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-hat
          image: podtato-head-hat:a
```

Now, let's assume that the configuration of that workload needs to be changed.
In this example we assume that the image of that workload
should be updated, but a configuration change is not limited to that.
From here, you essentially have two options:

* **Only update the configuration *without* updating the `app.kubernetes.io/version`
label:** This can be useful when the change in the configuration should happen regardless
of the result of any task or evaluation, e.g., when the previously used image has a critical vulnerability
and the image must be updated as quickly as possible.
To do that, change `podtato-head-frontend` as follows:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 4: please use external asset files and include them here for all the code examples in this file :)

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-frontend
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-frontend
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.1.0 # The version label stays the same and therefore no related KeptnWorkload will be affected
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-evaluations: my-evaluation
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-tasks: my-task
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-frontend
          image: podtato-head-frontend:b # Only the image tag has been updated from 'a' to 'b'
```

* **Update the configuration *and* the version label:**

>    Doing so causes the`KeptnWorkload` that is associated

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   Doing so causes the `KeptnWorkload` that is associated
```

    with the `podtato-head-frontend` deployment to be updated,
    and therefore the pre-task `my-task` and pre-evaluation `my-evaluation`
    are executed before the updated pods are scheduled.
In this case, the deployment should be changed as follows:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 4: please use external asset files and include them here for all the code examples in this file :)

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-frontend
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-frontend
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.2.0 # The version label is now updated as well
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-evaluations: my-evaluation
        keptn.sh/pre-deployment-tasks: my-task
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-frontend
          image: podtato-head-frontend:b # The image tag has been updated from 'a' to 'b'
```

If you have defined the related `KeptnApp` resource yourself,
this must also be updated to refer to the updated `KeptnWorkload`.
This is a mandatory step, since the `KeptnWorkload` associated with
this updated deployment is not able to progress otherwise.
Therefore, make sure that the version of `podtato-head-frontend`
is updated accordingly:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 4: please use external asset files and include them here for all the code examples in this file :)

apiVersion: lifecycle.keptn.sh/v1alpha3
kind: KeptnApp
metadata:
  name: podtato-head
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  version: "0.1.0"
  preDeploymentTasks:
    - wait-for-prometheus
  postDeploymentTasks:
    - post-deployment-loadtests
  workloads:
  - name: podtato-head-frontend
    version: 0.2.0 # Updated version. Needs to be set to the value of the 'app.kubernetes.io/version' label of the updated deployment
  - name: podtato-head-hat
    version: 1.1.1
```

Updating the `KeptnApp` also causes all pre-/post-tasks/evaluations
of the `KeptnApp` to be executed again.
In this example, this means that the tasks `wait-for-prometheus`,
and `post-deployment-loadtests` will run again.

If you are using the [automatic app discovery](../integrate#use-keptn-automatic-app-discovery),

> you do not need to update the `KeptnApp` resource.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
you do not need to update the `KeptnApp` resource.
Keptn will take care of that for you.
```

podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-podtato-head-hat-0.1.1        podtato-head    podtato-head-podtato-head-hat        0.1.1                Completed
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-podtato-head-frontend-0.2.0   podtato-head    podtato-head-podtato-head-frontend   0.2.0                Completed
```

As can be seen in the output of the command, the `KeptnWorkloadVersions` from the previous deployment
are still here, but a new `KeptnWorkloadVersion` for the updated workload has been added.
For the workload that remained unchanged (`podtato-head-hat`), no new `KeptnWorkloadVersion`
needed to be created.

Similarly, retrieving the list of `KeptnAppVersions` will reflect the update by
returning a newly created `KeptnAppVersion`.

```shell
$ kubectl get keptnappversion -n podtato-kubectl

NAMESPACE         NAME                          APPNAME        VERSION   PHASE
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-0.1.0-6bch3iak   podtato-head   0.1.0     Completed
podtato-kubectl   podtato-head-0.1.0-hf52kauz   podtato-head   0.1.0     Completed
```

## Adding a new Workload to an Application

> To add a new workload (e.g. a new deployment) to an existing app,

Reviewer 4: this link should be added to ALL occurrences of the word "workload"
```suggestion
To add a new [workload](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/)
(e.g. a new deployment) to an existing app,
```

you must:

* Make sure the
`keptn.sh/app`/`app.kubernetes.io/part-of` label/annotation is present
on the new workload
* Add the new workload to the `KeptnApp`,

> if you have previously defined the `KeptnApp resource manually.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
if you have previously defined the `KeptnApp` resource manually.
```

If the application has been discovered automatically, this step is not needed.

For example, to add the deployment `podtato-head-left-leg` to the
`podtato-head` application, the configuration for that new deployment
would look like this, with the required label being set:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 4: please use external asset files and include them here for all the code examples in this file :)

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-left-leg
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: podtato-head-left-leg
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: podtato-head
        app.kubernetes.io/version: 0.1.0
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: podtato-head-frontend
          image: podtato-head-left-leg:a
```

The `KeptnApp`, if defined by the user, should contain the
reference to the newly added workload.
This is mandatory, as the workload itself is not be able to
progress if it is not part of a `KeptnApp`.
For automatically discovered apps this is done
automatically.

> ```yaml

Reviewer 4: please use external asset files and include them here for all the code examples in this file :)
